frontend/README.md, before:

# Allerths bageri

A website made with Astro and Tailwind CSS.

![Allerths herb bakery](src/assets/box-med-bakat.jpg)

## Development

Install [Node.js 22](https://nodejs.org/) and [pnpm 10](https://pnpm.io/).

```sh
git clone https://github.com/paccao/allerthsbageri.se.git && \
cd allerthsbageri.se/ && \
pnpm i && \
pnpm dev
```

## Upgrade dependencies

```sh
pnpm outdated
pnpm up
```

Check Astrojs [upgrade guides](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#upgrade-guides) to upgrade major versions

```sh
pnpm dlx @astrojs/upgrade
```

## Email Spam Protection

1. Make a copy of `.env.example` and name it `.env`.
2. Add your email to `PUBLIC_EMAIL` in `.env`.
3. Add a strong random password to encrypt/decrypt your email to `PUBLIC_PASSWORD` in `.env`.
4. Open a terminal and run `pnpm encrypt:email`. Then copy the output (make sure you get every character) and add it to `PUBLIC_PAYLOAD` in `.env`.
5. Now, the email should be accessible in the `<EncryptedEmail />` component. Easily available for users, but most basic spam bots will not be able to extract the email.

Commit message:

Document process for updating dependencies

frontend/README.md, after:

# Allerths bageri

A website made with Astro and Tailwind CSS.

![Allerths herb bakery](src/assets/box-med-bakat.jpg)

## Development

Install [Node.js 24](https://nodejs.org/) and [pnpm 10](https://pnpm.io/).

```sh
git clone https://github.com/paccao/allerthsbageri.se.git && \
cd allerthsbageri.se/ && \
pnpm i && \
pnpm dev
```

## Upgrade dependencies

For general dependencies, these commands are helpful to check versions and make updates. Be careful to review release notes, changelogs and git diffs.

```sh
pnpm outdated
pnpm up
```

### `shadcn-svelte` components

1. Start by making sure your local git state is clean. Then, update one [shadcn-svelte](https://shadcn-svelte.com) component at a time with this command:

```sh
pnpm dlx shadcn-svelte@latest update
```

2. Then format the code to get cleaner diffs

```sh
pnpm format
```

3. Finally, review the git diffs and manually merge the changes from remote with our local project customisations.

### Astro

Check Astrojs [upgrade guides](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#upgrade-guides) to upgrade major versions

```sh
pnpm dlx @astrojs/upgrade
```

---

## Email Spam Protection

1. Make a copy of `.env.example` and name it `.env`.
2. Add your email to `PUBLIC_EMAIL` in `.env`.
3. Add a strong random password to encrypt/decrypt your email to `PUBLIC_PASSWORD` in `.env`.
4. Open a terminal and run `pnpm encrypt:email`. Then copy the output (make sure you get every character) and add it to `PUBLIC_PAYLOAD` in `.env`.
5. Now, the email should be accessible in the `<EncryptedEmail />` component. Easily available for users, but most basic spam bots will not be able to extract the email.
